So we'll just
wait for everyone to take their seats. Okay? Well, welcome members officially to
this the scrutiny week, looking here with the Minister of Finance on the
financial statements of the government for the year ending 30 June, 2025, I'd
like to also welcome Mr. Rennie and our other colleague here, sorry, what was
your name? Jane Winfield, thank you. Nice to see you here as well. So minister,
you're most welcome to give us some introductory remarks, and then we'll open it
up for a wider discussion. So welcome,
great. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you committee for inviting me to talk
about the 2024, 25 year end financial statements. Sitting beside me are Ian
Rima, the Secretary of the Treasury, and Jane Winfield, who is the Chief
government accountant, with the chairs permission. I'll just make a few
introductory remarks. The year end statements we are considering today are the
first to fully reflect decisions made by the current government, and they show
the first signs of progress in getting the country's books back in order. What
sets the year end statements apart from other financial releases, like the half
year or budget updates, is that these are actual numbers, not forecasts or
projections. So what are those actual numbers as a share of GDP, all crown
expenses fell from 33.1% in the 2324 year, to 32.5% in the 2425 year. The
government's intention in our fiscal strategy is to bring spending down even
more as a proportion of the economy towards 30% of GDP, and that is the key to
getting the books back to surplus. The government's headline operating balance
measure, the operating balance before gains and losses, excluding ACC or
obergau, x remains steady at a deficit of 2.1% of GDP in dollar terms, the
deficit came in $900 million better than was forecast at the time of the budget.
While that is progress, there is still a lot of work to do. The operating
balance has been a deficit for the past six years. The government's intention is
to return to surplus, and achieving that requires work over several years, not
just one or two. NET Core crown debt remains steady at 41.8% of GDP, and this
was the first year that debt hasn't grown in several years of the five previous
years, debt as a percentage of GDP rose every year. The government's intention
over the forecast period is to bend the debt curve from going up to going down.
More specifically, it is to put NET Core crown debt as a percentage of GDP on a
downward trajectory towards 40% members will be aware that the Treasury did some
thorough Analysis and Modelling in 2022 and recommended a net debt ceiling of
50% of GDP. This was accepted by then finance minister, Grant Robertson, and by
me, and I am heartened by the fact that at least some members of this committee
have publicly stated their commitment to keeping net debt below this level. That
is important both for New Zealand's fiscal sustainability and for our
credibility with international lenders who continue to provide funding for new
purposes, as well as rolling over existing debt. The 2024, 25 year end
statements also set the starting point for the next set of fiscal forecasts.
Treasury will present those in the Half Year Economic and Fiscal Update on 16
December. Members will be aware that economic forecasts have generally been
revised down over the past two years as a greater understanding has developed
about the nature and duration of the downturn and the recovery, these revisions
have made the government's fiscal strategy harder to achieve. Earlier this year,
I asked the Treasury to do a breakdown of changes in operating balance forecasts
over time. This confirmed that the biggest reason by far for the change in
obergau X forecasts over time has been downward revisions in treasuries, tax
revenue forecasts, excluding tax policy changes. It has not been a result of
discretionary fiscal policy. In fact, obergau x would be billions of dollars
worse than currently forecast. Asked if we hadn't made significant savings to
achieve much tighter budget allowances. Those savings cumulatively amount to $43
billion over this government's first two budgets. All of those savings were
opposed by the opposition in closing, let me acknowledge the team at Treasury
and the Office of the Auditor General for their role in presenting these
accounts. And I am happy to take your questions.
Thank you, Minister, and thank you for focusing on that financial year, 2024 25
it certainly makes my job easier here. We're going to go to Labor's lead the
honourable Barbara Edmonds,
Kia Ora Minister, thank you for appearing today. Minister. You often say that
you're increasing infrastructure spending, but your accounts showed that you
weren't spending it, and that the capital commitments you have also not
contracted them. So
how do
you reconcile your comments with your accounts,
with the simple reality that over the next four years, we have budgeted to
invest a record 61 point 8 billion in public infrastructure. That number is only
set to grow with at least an additional 13 I'm
going
to answer your question with an additional 13 question.
Just, let's just let the minister answer. We will. We will let the questionnaire
ask a question or his question in silence, and we'll also pay the same courtesy
to the answer. Thank you.
With an additional 13 point 2 billion in capital earmarked for allocation across
the next four budgets, for contrast, that is a very good step out from the 50
point 6 billion that the previous government invested between 2019
and
2020, year, not talking about forecast spending. I'm talking about the last
financial year you spent less, but you've been saying you are spending more. How
does your comments reconcile with the actual numbers in your financial year
accounts?
Because at every budget we have allocated additional capital expenditure on top
of that which was committed by the previous government. It is the case
colleagues that any budget, sorry, any government's capital allocations are the
result of cumulative Decisions, decisions that are made in many years previous,
which are then only spent in a particular year. It is also the case that
considerable period of shovel ready projects and the like under the previous
government have have come to an end in some cases. And it is also the case that
many projects were delayed in delivery, as the last government was good at doing
press releases, but not so good at getting shovels and we now and Christmas.
Okay, okay, right. Can we give another question?
We've had that discussion before?
Okay, no, that's all right. We've, we've, well, that's fine. We're just carrying
on. Fine, carrying on. No, no, it's not the focus of today. But we're going to
go to, we're going to go to, back to honourable Edmonds,
so minister, see how spending $2.9 billion less on capital projects has resulted
in less money flowing through the construction industry the economy, and that's
contributed to the construction sector losing 20,000 roles in the last year.
No, I don't accept your analysis and budget 2025, we injected new capital
funding on 6.8 billion to infrastructure. And in our budget 2024 we allocated
considerable additional funding to infrastructure. And what I would also say,
and I'm sure the member is aware, that high interest rates play a critical role
in construction market activity, and that is why it has been so important to
support the reserve bank to get inflation under control, to enable interest rate
reductions. It is the case that a significant proportion of construction
activity is privately funded, and for our part as a government, what we have
done to accelerate that investment is twofold. First, we have introduced fast
track legislation to ensure that projects such as the expansion of the Auckland
port, new housing developments in Nelson and elsewhere are able to come to the
market sooner. Second, what we have done is ensured that in addition to those
consenting changes coming through quickly, that wherever we can? We have put
downward pressure on interest rates.
So Minister, can you absolutely then confirm then for the committee that in the
last financial year that you spent more or less? Which one is
it? We have continued to make additional investments in the government's capital
allocation.
Okay, I've got a supplementary here.
Have you finished? Yep, I've
got a supplementary from Dr
woods,
Minister. You say that that's the four year allocation and that it will be
spent, however, the capital commitments and the Crown accounts show that there
hasn't been contracting either. So how do you propose that this money is going
to be spent over that. Time period, and wouldn't it be better to give certainty
to the industry so they didn't need to keep laying people off? And we see the
construction sector bleeding jobs like we currently are. Why has there not been
contracting activity?
Well, I'm very happy to address that question. I went through this in the house
with your colleague, ora Williams, because there has been a misinterpretation of
the table that I think you and Barbara Edmonds have referred to what that table
looks at. Happy to give you an explanation
which which table, please,
please.
Give me the courtesy of answering. I will set that
out for you which table.
So the table that you referring to is about contracted projects, and what that
refers to is projects that have a contract to be delivered in the future. It
does not refer to all of the capital that has been allocated. In some cases,
projects that are contracted are the result of allocations that have been made
several, several budgets previous. For our part, what the government discovered
coming into office is that a habit had been built up under the past government
that there was significant delays between budget funding being allocated and
contracts being signed, delays of more more than a couple of years, in many
cases. So we have worked to accelerate the deployment of capital, and you have
seen that with the $7 billion of infrastructure projects that we are ensuring
have shovels in the ground ahead of Christmas. Because in the end, you don't
create a construction job by doing a press release. You actually need to ensure
that the funding is in contract and has been delivered. And we expect several
projects will be contracted over the coming months.
Thank you,
Minister, we've got a
supplementary. You don't create a job by a press release, but you create jobs by
getting contracts that your government is not doing that. Now, Minister, you've
pointed to a table in the crown accounts that you have said that myself and
Barbara Ed burns and ano Williams are misinterpreting which table number is
that,
Minister, there's a table referred to in the bifou and the budget update, which
you're which is the which is the table referring to contracting? I presumed you
referring to that table? Which
are you referring to? No, no, you refer
to it in the budget.
Okay, let's move on another supplementary. I
was going to ask that question too. So is the Minister now opening up the beef
as well.
I'm simply referring to the members question, and if she's referring to a
different table, I encourage you to tell me,
Dr Russell, the advice I've had from the Clarke's office in recent days is
ministers can talk about more general issues, trends and themes in the sector.
And so we do have that licence to talk broader. And I will be as generous as I
can to the latitude I can give opposition members as well. I'm going to go to a
supplement. Okay,
so how much has actually been contract administered?
Between now and Christmas, $7 billion worth of projects will have spades in the
ground. And
I want
to give you
a sense. Let the minister answer please,
to give you a sense of what that means, one of the issues that members
frequently refer to is delivery of public housing. In the last 23 months, under
this government, more than 7000 more new built homes and social housing have
been delivered that contrasts with the entire three years previous, in which the
last Labour government delivered fewer than that.
So where was the funding allocated for
that across several budgets?
Ora,
we're going
to
go to go to our Deputy Chair. Mr.
Ryan Hamilton,
thank you. I call it thank you. I call it. We're going to go the funding. We're
going to go to our deputy chair. Ryan
Hamilton, thank you.
Everyone's very excited today, Mr. Chair, it's the Christmas chair, I
suppose. Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair for finally getting a supplementary
from the side of the table. Deborah Russell made a point around Can
we ask
the question?
Yeah, okay, please. Can we hear the question in silence?
Deborah Russell talked about reduction in construction expenditure, but more
construction spending doesn't necessarily mean more efficiency. And minister,
isn't it true that we had to reduce some construction through the likes of state
owned Kainga ora because of the inefficiencies and gold plating that was in the
lack of accountability that was through that agency. Okay,
right? You've
made it. Yeah. Look, one of the things that I'm very proud of our ministers for
doing across the board is ensuring that when we're committing capital funding,
we don't just measure ourselves on the size of the cheque, but actually on the
value that is delivered for that. And the classic case is an education where
Minister Stanford has worked very effectively to ensure that the average cost.
Cost of a new classroom has reduced from around 1.2 million to more, like
$600,000 and of course, the effect of that is New Zealanders get more bang for
their buck up to twice as many classrooms for the same amount of spend. And we
should hold ourselves accountable for achieving that. It's not enough to say I
spent more. You actually need to deliver more, and our government has been very
focused on making changes to capital allocation process and infrastructure
delivery to ensure
that's the case. Okay, thank you, Minister. So just on that, if I heard you
correctly, you're saying we're virtually delivering twice as much for the
same cost. And actually that is, that is work that's occurring across the board,
and one of the things that we have asked ministers to do is put in place longer
term plans for infrastructure delivery. So if you've seen an education and
health we have published plans that look a decade or two into the future about
what the pipeline
of
activity is required to both replace ageing buildings, maintain them and respond
to growth. And that ensures that we prioritise the right projects in the right
order. It also provides the construction sector clarity over what the pipeline
ahead of them looks like, so they can ensure that their workforces are equipped
to deliver those projects.
Okay? Thank you. Thank you. Mr. Hamilton, we're going to go to Chloe
cool. So I've got quite a few questions about the nationally determined
contribution right, and I'd like them to just if we can be as succinct as
possible noting how limited time we're operating within. So is the government
committed to meeting the nationally determined contribution?
Yes, that remains our priority.
And is all of that NDC going to be met domestically?
Well, we have said that we're not prepared to spend billions of dollars sending
money offshore to meet that NDC.
Is all of that NDC going to be met domestically or not?
We are working very hard to ensure that our priority of domestic climate action
is met, and you will have seen that we have both achieved the first emissions
budget, are on track to achieve the second, and are making very good progress
domestically.
I'd
refer you to the climate change Commission's hearing yesterday, which puts all
of that in substantial doubt that nonetheless, we've also had from your minister
of climate changes signing of a number of MOUs with other jurisdictions,
indicating that you are intending to meet that NDC offshore. I guess I just
wanted to get clarity from you, because you've talked a lot about transparency
and about financial responsibility. Are you, as Minister of Finance, committed
to making transparent the potential liability under the NDC on the next budget,
I
refer the Member to page 25 of the financial statements, and I would read this
very clear sentence, the judgement to not recognise the liability, which is both
treasuries judgement and a judgement assessed and approved by the Office of the
Auditor General, is formed On the view that there is no legal obligation to
achieve the NDCs, nor has there been a constructive obligation to meet the
targets.
I see that and raise you the final paragraph of that very page, which is this
judgement is consistent with the accounting treatment for the FSG since 2021 but
is kept under review as future government's actions, policies, circumstances, an
announcement could change the NDCs accounting treatment, for example, by
announcing or committing to specific plans to achieve the NDCs. What that means,
Minister is that you have full discretion over whether this potential liability
is represented on the books. I am saying, as the CO leader of the Green Party
that I would love for it to be represented on the books. That's a starting point
for cross partisanship agreement on this. Do you, as Minister of Finance,
believe that there should be that transparency afforded to New Zealanders for
sake of financial responsibility to have that represented on the books,
regardless of what Treasury is saying
about the
legal obligation? No.
Interesting. Okay, okay, yep.
So your government and your decisions are seeing the rapid crunching of
government spending. Businesses are not borrowing and households are heavily
indebted. Your operating allowance was already below what Treasury said was
necessary for business as usual service provision and signs are fiscal
projections are now deteriorating, meaning that you will have to borrow more as
New Zealanders get less and less. When do you accept that your current fiscal
strategy is a doom loop.
I disagree with the member's characterisation. In fact, I would encourage you to
read the Reserve Bank's recent monetary policy statement, which makes clear that
significant reductions in interest rates are ensuring that more New Zealanders
are actually able to borrow for a mortgage we currently have. And I know the
member cares about this, the highest number of first time buyers in the market
than we have had in several years, and I think that reflects the fact that when
interest rates are lower, it does afford people with lower incomes to enter the
housing market. And that is a positive thing as we look ahead, independent
economists, including those at the Reserve Bank and elsewhere are forecasting
that inflation is set to go lower than it currently is, which means fewer price
rises for New Zealanders who have struggled with the cost of living. And it also
is forecasting faster growth, which, of course, will allow for more job creation
and income growth. Those are positive things. I don't deny for a minute that it.
Has been a very difficult several years for many New Zealanders in this economy.
But what I would highlight for the member is that the Sugar Rush economics,
which allowed inflation to hit generational highs and be sustained at those
levels for a long time, has done a huge amount of damage to our economy. We are
recovering from that. It will require ongoing discipline from the government. We
can never again return to the days of reckless spending that has damaged our
economy. It has damaged our books. It's damaged I
guess the
counterfactual to the final stop? Yeah, I guess the counterfactual to that would
be reckless cuts, which in turn mean that we potentially end up needing to
borrow more. Are you ruling out that you will need to borrow more? I
completely disagree with that member's analysis. We have not been reckless. We
have been careful and targeted. And what I'd also highlight is that that
actually means we borrow less. The simple reality is that if we hadn't made the
efficiencies in the public service, the changes to policy settings, the country
would be far, far further in debt. We would likely be paying much higher
interest rates, and we would be more in the hoc to international lenders than we
are today. This government has reintroduced fiscal prudence, and it couldn't
have
come soon enough. Okay, I'm going to give three supplementaries off this, one
each to Dr Deborah Russell, Todd Stevenson and Nancy Lu so dr Russell,
one each, first primary, which is around the national tournament, contributions.
And I want to read a sentence out loud, word for word, from the exact note that
the minister referred to on page 25 and it says, while New Zealand's priority is
to use domestic climate action to meet NDC targets, it is likely the use of
offshore mitigation will be required to achieve the NDC one target. So that's
sitting in the analysis of that particular note. So given that we think it is
likely we're going to have to use offshore mitigation, why has that likely
commitment been recognised in the financial statements?
Because that it is the judgement of the Treasury and the Office of the Auditor
General that a constructive obligation doesn't exist. I refer the Member also to
the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice, which states that
states countries are required to make the best efforts to meet the NDCs, but
that the obligation requires does not require parties to achieve it
so. But nevertheless, sitting in the financial statements, which I believe you
would have signed off, Minister, there is a sentence that says it is likely the
use of offshore mitigation will be required to achieve the NDC one target, given
that it is likely we're going to have to use offshore mitigation, what
recognition of that is there in these accounts,
this simple recognition, I will Always put New Zealanders first, and I do not
believe it is in their interests to send billions of dollars offshore to meet
your liability that James Shaw ratchet it up for this country in a reckless
okay, we can go to Todd Stevenson act.
Thank you. My supplementary is related to core crown debt. So I'm on page five
of the financial statements, and I just want to talk a little bit about you made
some opening comments that debt now is 41.8% of GDP. It hasn't grown. In fact, I
think actually the graph here shows that
debt
actually reduced against what was forecast. So a couple of questions I want to
understand, really, yeah, what is that? Basically, obviously, we have to pay a
lot of interest on that debt, so I'm keen to understand that. And then you also
talked about the budget allowances and making savings there. So what kind of
decisions in the statements we're looking at were driven by the fact that we
actually have reasonably high debt in the servicing of that
Yeah. Look, you're correct on a historical basis, debt is a lot higher than it
has been in recent decades. It roughly doubled under the last government and
that comes with a big servicing cost. So our current debt servicing costs around
9 billion a year, put that number into context, that would be enough to pay for
a full year of operations of the entire New Zealand police force combined with
the entire New Zealand Defence Force, combined with the entire ministry for
corrections, all of the prison service and the entire customs service and
ministry for justice. So $9 billion is a significant amount of funding, and the
more we ratchet up our debt, the more we are asking taxpayers today and future
generations to put aside their tax to service our debt and not to build the
future that they deserve. So that's why our government is determined to get the
books back in balance so that we can get into a position where we bend that deep
curve down and provide more flexibility and choices for future taxpayers
and just one quick supplementary and so restraining the operating allowances is
one way of trying to address that issue
Exactly. And so one of the core parts of our fiscal strategy is setting tight
operating allowances for discretionary spending. In contrast the last.
Government did two things. One, had very high operating allowances relative to
where they'd been previously and where they are now. And two, had a regular
habit that whatever operating allowance they said they'd stick to, they then
blew at every budget. And that has the effect of blowing up spending as a
proportion of the economy over time, so that where it had been around 27% it
blew out to more like 34% and so we're trying to get it back into the even field
of around 30% of GDP. And just to be clear about what that means, that means
more of the money that New Zealanders earn and generate through their own
efforts is available for them to spend. Because we don't believe that the
government is always best to spend your money better than you do. We want
households and businesses to keep more of their own cash.
Thank you. Okay, we're going to go to us up. Nancy
Liu, Thank you, Chair, and thank you minister. This is a supplementary question
to Chloe's question. So after years of like you have said, Minister, the sugar
coating economy and the super high in platinum by Kiwis supplementary
Christians,
the government's
financial statement actually, in my opinion, shows real sign of stabilisation
for New Zealand. Net ground debt is lower than forecast, and despite the global
headwinds on page four of the financial statement, total revenue is 169 point
billion in revenue higher than last year. Now my question is, given the
stabilisation that we're seeing in the financial statement, can you outline how
much worse would it be for debt and also a deficit position if your government
hadn't made early baseline savings across Parliamentary Services.
Yeah. Well, look, it is absolutely the case that if we had stuck to the higher
operating allowances forecast by the last government, then we would be billions
of dollars more in deficit and more in debt with the higher debt servicing costs
that would have come with that, it is also the case that changes we made early
on, for example, to ensure that benefits, rather than being indexed to a higher
ratio, are just indexed to the cost of living, that that has a structural
impact, because it not only reduces spending in this year, but into the future.
So we have worked hard to make sure that the finances are sustainable in the
short, medium and long term. It is the case that we have been spending to get
through the recovery, because as the economy has been in downturn, we've had to
support New Zealanders who have been out of work. We've had to ensure we keep
funding going to our schools and our hospitals, and so there is a deficit and
reflection of that. But at the same time, we've been working very hard to
reprioritise so that the books can return to surplus and are sustainable in the
future.
Okay, thank you. I'm going to go to Deborah Russell for a Sup, and then we're
going to go to primaries, because there's a number of speakers here,
so just
members that haven't had their primaries, and we're down to 18 minutes.
So
Ms, Swarbrick, we're not going to have additional sups. You this all these sups
have been off your primary where you had two or three sups after your primary.
Now you're coming at the end for more sups. We're going to move back to the
primaries, but first Dr Russell,
so minister, it's really interesting, because the increase in the depth due to
the exigencies of the covid pandemic, it was around about the same as the the
increase in debt as a result of the global financial crisis. Are you saying that
sort of analysis you've just talked about in terms of sugar coating and various
other pejorative terms is exactly the same as the analysis that could be applied
to Bill English.
No very simple difference under Bill English, inflation never got to 7.3% Ms
Russell, nor did it stay out of band for three years, and that had a
significantly corrosive impact on New Zealand households who were burdened with
a cost of living. Crisis that was disgraceful led to a extraordinary increase in
interest rates and the strangling of the economy that resulted from that, and it
was wrong for your government to increase spending dramatically, right? When the
Reserve Bank was begging you to put on the brakes, I'm
saying that you're that increased spending was, of course, backed by the
National Party and backed by the national call for even more spending. We're
going to we're going to go to a primary question, someone who's been
characteristically by Rawiri Waititi,
thank you, Mr. Speaker for that introduction. Minister, could you? Could you
answer this question for me? Maori, contribution to GDP is in the billions, and
that's iwi entities, SMEs, primary industries, growing workforce given the
significance and the growing contribution Maori make to the national economy,
what portion of GDP growth in the year ending 30 June is attributed to Maori
economics activity, and how has this changed from the previous previous year?
We. Aware that the Ministry for business does analysis of the proportion of
growth coming from the Maori economy. Unfortunately, those statistics aren't up
to date for the previous financial year due to the collection of data and the
lag in that but what that does show over the past several years is that the
Maori economy has been growing faster than the economy as a whole, which is very
heartening, and is something that I would I think is a great force for good in
the economy, because when the Maori economy is growing, that creates more jobs,
more incomes. It's a positive thing.
It doesn't marry with the current statistics for Maori unemployment, which is
double there, with non Maori up at around 10% which is the highest we've seen in
decades. On that just a supplementary budget, 2024 given that Maori do
contribute billions to the GDP budget, 24 removed, 2425 removed or reduced
targeted funding for Maori health, housing, education, employment and crown
Maori partnership structures, Treasury has historically warned that doing so
worsens long term fiscal risk. So my question is, what assessment was undertaken
on the economic consequences of defunding Maori specific programmes in the 2024
2025, year, and Will the minister release that analysis?
Look, I actually disagree with some of the assertions you've made in that
question, because take health, there is still a specific allocation for Maori
health services as part of the allocation of funding to health New Zealand. And
that number increased in budget, 24 rather than decreased. It is still the case
that in the education budget, for example, not only is there specific funding
allocation to support Maori medium education across kauhanga, reo, kura kaupapa,
but also there were specific capital allocations to support the infrastructure
needed for those services. What is the case also is that, as you know, Maori
benefit from our investment and services across the board, whether that is the
significant uplift in health spending, which is a proportion of GDP is now the
highest it has been in many, many years, whether that's the investment in
education, not only the investment, but the commitment to achievement, which, in
the latest results from the structured numeracy and literacy trials are seeing
Maori educational achievement have some of the most healthy increases we have
seen for years. So I just reject the idea that this government wouldn't not be
committed to increasing the living standards of Maori. We absolutely are.
Can you? Can you answer this question? Minister, the government has borrowed
another $33 billion and with no catastrophe, no covid, no whakaatae,
no
earthquakes. Can you just explain to me why there is a higher the why, the why
the debt is worse to GDP ratio in decades? Can you, can you explain that to us?
Please?
Yes, I can. And it's a very good question. And every time members along that
side tell me, I'm wrong to have made savings. I think they need to listen to the
answer to this question, because it is the case that New Zealand, in a time of
lower growth, does need to borrow to do things like deliver education and health
services. Now we do have a choice. We could say, actually, no, it's more
important that we immediately get the books back to balance, and what that would
require would be significant reductions in service delivery across the economy.
Our government has rejected that course. Instead, what we've set is a steady
path to getting the books back into balance, which will ensure that over the
medium term, we can achieve debt reduction. I think we've struck the right
balance at every term, when we've delivered savings, we've had people jump up
and say, How dare they. It is the case. But if we hadn't made those difficult
choices, the debt would be a lot, lot worse.
Okay, thank you. Have we got to stop here from Dan bidwise.
Thanks, Mr. Chair minister, just to that point, any indication from you or your
ministry around how much extra debt we would be carrying if it wasn't for the
decisions that you made in this budget.
Well, look, I am going to do that tally because I think those who claim that
they're going to be good at saying no, better start learning how to say no,
because over the past couple of years, whether it's the pay equity changes,
which result in about $13 billion worth of spending that would have been
required, whether it's the reduction in the baselines of some back office,
public service agencies, whether it's changes, as I said, to the way that
benefits are paid in this country, those changes cumulatively have saved the
taxpayer billions of dollars a year. And those members who both say we shouldn't
have done those things, but also the debt should be lower, have an
irreconcilable position. The good news is next year they'll have to reconcile
it, and New Zealanders will see that they still can't add,
okay, I've got a sub here from closer,
yeah. So a lot of just. Question, obviously about debt. But you know, the flip
side of that is, of course, as you've also alluded, to spending and choices that
the government has made or foregone revenue through the likes of the $15 billion
tax cuts, which treasury and IRD advise you would disproportionately go towards
the top 40% of income earners. So I guess I just wanted to ask about those other
debts, the ones that aren't represented on our books, for example, the costs of
inequality and inter general intergenerational harm of enabling more
homelessness, more climate changing emissions and tolerating greater child
poverty as a result of the government decisions that you've made. Are you
measuring or tracking any of those things, and do you have concern for them?
Couple of things. First on tax reduction, I find it ironic that the member is
claiming concern for households who find themselves indebted or struggling, and
yet she would have rejected tax reduction for those very we've got other plans,
and we ensured that that tax reduction was targeted at middle income families,
particularly those with high child care costs, and particularly Those on working
for families and those who needed additional support without those tax
reductions, there is no doubt many New Zealand households would be a lot worse
off today. Second, there is a philosophical point here, which is, what is the
best way to ensure that a family has the independence, choices and opportunities
that I think we all around this table want them to have. Well, our view is that
actually, you need to build an economy that creates sustainable work
opportunities. You need to educate their kids better, and you don't actually
help them by saying our hope for you is a life on welfare with an ever higher
benefit that is no wage. Well, you promote universal welfare payments. And I'm
sorry, but the kind of New Zealand that I want to see is one actually where we
have universal jobs, and people get up in the morning and
know that there, for example.
Okay, let's go back to a primary from the honourable Barbara Edmonds
minister. Do you stand by your statement that there will be no frontline service
cuts under your watch?
Well, I Yes, it
already happened. And do you believe that being any Have there been any
frontline service? I
think there have been changes in frontline service delivery, but overall, we
have ensured that resources have been prioritised to the frontline.
So in relation to frontline service cuts, one of the contingent liabilities, but
now set out, is an actual provision, and which is the reason why the number of
breaches to appropriations has increased from 377 million to 1.5 billion. Is
because of the veterans disability entitlement matter. So the agent orange case
that went through the Veterans Affairs and then obviously it's now had a high
court ruling on it. Will you make any changes to the veterans and disabilities
entitlements as a result of that court case.
Look, that's a matter for cabinet to consider in due course, we remain very
committed to veterans support and honouring those who have fought for our
country is very important to our government. It's actually not just honouring
those who have fought for our country, it's honouring those who may in future,
fight for our country, which is why we've made a commitment to be doubling New
Zealand's investment in defence spending as a share of GDP, and have committed
to a significant defence capability plan, because we see that without security,
there cannot be prosperity.
So why did the crown choose to take that case to the High Court, which has now
increased the liability. Why did the crown choose to do it, knowing that it was
on a losing platform?
Well, look, it would be appropriate to put that to the Minister responsible for
Crown law, or the Minister responsible for veterans. However, it's always the
case that where the crown thinks that there are issues, where the law is not
being interpreted as the crown would, then it defends its position.
Can I put that into the secretary for Treasury, please, Mr. Chair, particularly
given I want to know the assurances in relation to you put down as a large as a
appropriation. I think it was estimated a 3.2 billion that was later increased
to 1.2 billion. How can the public have assurance in relation to those costs.
So we went for for year end, we went through with the actuaries to do a
valuation of what we thought those costs would be. Those costs then were
audited. So the the year end costs, with all the assumptions with an actuary,
are what we've booked. So the increase of the 1.5 billion, the change from the
budget to the year end was where an incorrect assumption had been made in the
initial valuation report,
which is now Stafford versus the Attorney General costs as well. How can the
public be assured that the treatment that you're taking to those contingent
liabilities is, how can they be confident in what you're doing, given that those
both, both those appeals, there was much, there was a greater increase in those
appropriations. As a result,
I'm just going to defend my officials here, because I will not have you implying
in any way that they have done. On anything other than ascribed to universal
accounting standards, which have then been audited by the Office of the Auditor
General for their appropriateness, and they have been given
a million.
Thank you. One person speaking at a time. What's your supplementary ms, Gibbons,
it's quite clear that what I'm trying to achieve understand is, can the public
have assurance in the process in the system, and which Treasury use to estimate
the contingent liability as a result of legal judgments, given that it was had
gone from 300 the increase in the instances of breaches from 377 million to 1.5
billion as a result of two legal cases?
Well, the answer
to
your that's quite a big increase, and the public should be assured around the
process in which Treasury use to assess that. That's so
the answer to your question is yes, they can be assured. And to give you an
example, in terms of the Stafford case, you will be aware that the court made
judgments about the obligations that the crown had in that case, and
appropriately, those obligations are recognised, and these year end financial
statements which are in front of you today, and that is Mr. Chair, even though
those monies haven't actually been paid, there's a recognition that with the
court's judgement that liability exists for the government. So I'm comfortable
about the accounting treatment and and I do repeat that we have a history of
independent accountants in the Treasury who do a very good job of interpreting
their obligations. They are audited by the Office of the Auditor General, and
they are ascribing to the same standards that were in place under successive
previous government.
Okay, we're going to Dr David Wilson,
Minister, refer to page five, the obergau x and in particular, looking at Crown
entities, deficit reduction and the SOE just peaking above in terms of turning a
surplus to government. What's your view for based on this the coming years? And
what would you expect from those two?
Yeah, look, I'll have an opportunity to set out the forecasts on those matters
at the half year update in a couple of weeks. It is the case that many of our
SOEs make better returns when the economy is an upswing. If you think, for
example, of kiwi rail, when the economy is going faster, there's more freight on
the right, on the trains, and that leads to better returns for them. It's also
the case that some things follow different cycles, so in the example of land
court, obviously when the milk price is higher, they are able to deliver more
profitability. So it is variable from SOE to SOE. For our part as a government,
we look at both SOEs and crown entities, and across both, we expect financial
and fiscal discipline, commercial performance and clarity of delivery. And it is
the case that across many of those entities, we've made refreshments to
governance purpose and are holding them to much closer account than had
previously been the case.
Why post offices are closing?
Okay, we're gonna go to Ryan Hana,
post the letters.
Thank you. Chair, parcels. Minister, what early indicators from budget 2425 I'll
just sorry, just repeat that. What early indicators from budget 2425 indicate
that the economy is trending in the right direction, particularly, particularly
around business investment, inflation and productivity.
Yeah. Well, look, first you got to fix the basics, and so getting inflation back
in band and being able to forecast it coming back to the middle of that band is
critical. That's the stability on which the economy depends. Having multiple
interest rate reductions is also a necessary fundamental for allowing growth to
recover. As we look ahead, we are seeing signs that business confidence has
revived. It's now the highest it has been in 11 years. Consumer confidence is
also growing. Retail spend is above what people were forecasting at this point,
and there are economists confidently predicting that not only were we growing in
the third quarter, but that that growth has accelerated into the period that we
are in now. The Reserve Bank and others are forecasting growth to accelerate
further into the new year. So all of those things are the conditions that allow
people to feel better off in their own households and their own small
businesses. And that's absolutely what we want to see.
Okay, I'm going to go to a primary here, possibly the last from the honourable
Dr Deborah Russell,
Minister, I want to talk about the emissions trading scheme, and in particular,
you took a decision early on, when you were in government, to fold the proceeds
from the emissions trading scheme into the consolidated fund, instead of doing
as we had done, which was to hold it for use in various climate type activities.
One of the interesting things that's happened, if we go to note 21 in your
accounts, is that the emissions trading scheme was running at as it were, a
loss. The government has had to back it up because of the level to which the
the. Um, carbon price. So the carbon price, I think, had increased, and that
created liabilities, which created change for the government. Subsequent to
these accounts, the government took a decision to decouple unit prices and
volumes within the emissions trading scheme from our nationally determined
contributions that had an immediate impact on climate markets. The carbon price
launched. It's now trading as of Friday, I haven't been able to get those
figures from yesterday yet, at about $40 a tonne, that's going to have exactly
the reverse impact on your financials. In fact, it's going to make your
financials look better because you destabilised the market. Was that a
deliberate decision in order to make your financials look better?
That decision reflected the fact that we think it's appropriate. The missions
trading scheme is attached to our legal obligations under the zero carbon Act
and the domestic targets therein,
supplementary, a significant change to the way the ETS operates, and that is
going to have an impact on your financials, such that they make your financials
look better. Well,
that's
very much as though that was decision it was taken just in order to get your
books in order.
Well,
when you're a conspiracy theorist, you see conspiracy everywhere, and there was
no Oh for
goodness. Okay, no.
Thank you
very much. Thank you Minister. Thank you Rene. Thank you Jane Winfield,
for
your attendance this morning and for your willingness to engage. We really
appreciate that. Wish you all
the very best. Merry Christmas, everyone, and I hope those who need it get a
good break. Thank
you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay, right? Members, we to private. Can
we
if the media and any officials outside?